---
title: Oneself in the Words of Others
layout: post
date: 2017-09-29
---

The title character of Borges’ “[Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote](http://mail01.tinyletterapp.com/PracticeCatalogue/oneself-in-the-words-of-others/9613897-hispanlit.qwriting.qc.cuny.edu/files/2011/06/borges-pierre-menard.pdf?c=263bb460-e49b-4bcf-891f-1453e8ac1cb7)” has a
blessing and a problem, and the blessing and problem have the same source.
Menard is both doomed and emboldened by his knowledge of the exact content and
dimension of his artistic ambition: the opus he yearns to write coincides, word
for word, with the Quixote. He has read Cervantes’ novel and now he wants to
author it.

Menard is, at the moment of the parable’s telling, unsure how to proceed, “for
he did not propose to copy” Cervantes’ novel, but rather, by means too absurd or
intricate or metaphysically-implicated for Borges to precisely elaborate,
undertake whatever adventure of life and of cognition would bring about the
Quixote _again_:

> To be, in some way, Cervantes and reach the Quixote seemed less arduous to
> him––and, consequently, less interesting––than to go on being Pierre Menard and
> reach the Quixote through the experiences of Pierre Menard.

He requires that he arrive at the novel by his own cunning and labor, that he
compose his life and intuition such that his intuition and life compose _Don
Quixote_. He alone must be the conduit of this vast and moving product of
imagination. That this product _already exists_, lacking nothing, is a problem,
but (and this is the parable’s leap into the beyond) perhaps not an impassable
one.

We could imagine a Menard, arriving on the scene in the half-century after
Warhol, becoming what came to be called a conceptual writer. Menard is not
deluded that the world needs a new book. He has not come to narrate his anguish
or earned wisdom; he does not “have something to say.” He might have slapped his
own name on the Quixote and sold copies on the street á la Richard Prince, or
retyped it in the style Kenny Goldsmith, or tweeted its every line like Vanessa
Place. But he’d be unmoved by these projects (he’s explicit about this). Such
actions––we’ve learned to speak of them as provocative, “interesting”––would
fall woefully short of his inspiration.

A contemporary novelist in a more conventional mode might speak of a book
modeled on or influenced by the Quixote––an homage to a canonical work
nevertheless updated, seen anew, touched up by the latecoming writer’s hand.
Borges’ tale helps us see in this apparently reasonable framing a sublimation
we’ve thoroughly naturalized––the conversion of an unacceptable desire (to be
the author of another’s book) into a culturally prestigious form. Menard’s
calculation is insane and unassailable: Why aim for a worse Quixote when the
Quixote itself is possible?

Menard takes a position that before Borges’ parable would’ve seemed logically
and psychologically incoherent: he divests entirely from the pull of concepts at
the very core of our literary mythos (creativity, innovation, originality) while
indulging an extravagant belief that literary composition may offer an
experience of the self coming into possession of profound capacities. By
Cervantes’ words Menard will become _himself_ (his self expanded, intensified,
more fully realized), if only he can arrive there, as we say, authentically.

Menard’s model is probably impossible for the practicing writer to take on
board. He’s a fool––a fool whose inspiration shames our own. His conception of
the act of writing is at once enormous and drastically curtailed. Call it the
psychic romance of “original genius” uncoupled from originality. We’re unlikely
to follow him all the way to _either_ edge of the opposition he holds in such
remarkable suspension. Easiest just to say he’s an eccentric case. And yet,
Menard might be more searching and less defended in answering a question we
don’t permit ourselves to ask: What are we denying ourselves––what are we
_obscuring_––by the need to see our words as our own?

Assumptions about creative labor and its products are deeply seated. Norms and
cultural preferences pass into ideology and are finally embodied in our own
instincts. It’s hard to see past or outside of this acculturation. Still, it’s
useful to remember that the arrangements we’ve come to are not the only
arrangements possible, nor the only with a meaningful degree of internal
coherence. In a note collected in the posthumous Gravity and Grace, the French
mystic Simone Weil gives a description of the imagination’s work at once
beautiful and jarringly skew to our mythology of art and creativity: “We use
imagination to try to fill a universe which is already full. We must not imagine
that we can fill it more, but trust that it is there, and work towards it.” This
complex statement takes us quickly from our complacent pieties to a vaster
scale, where our commonplaces about art-making begin to lose purchase. To
believe, in some form, that all is full already, that nothing new can or need be
added under the sun, is perhaps a spiritual achievement, but for artists such a
belief would risk a death of purpose. In the fictional Pierre Menard, Weil
would’ve found a reader able to assent to her premises and nevertheless hear in
her aphorism’s final clause––the injunction to “work toward” the already
existing fullness––the call to effort, adventure, and risk.

